The question people ask is “how do I make the best beer possible?” The simple answer is to start with immaculate cleanliness and sanitation, followed closely by a controlled and deliberate fermentation.  Surprisingly, recipe and ingredient selection are less important overall than most people expect.  Ingredient freshness of course cannot be ignored as stale or oxidized ingredients will stand out but substitutions can freely be made within similar flavor “families” as well as country of origin without major effect on the finished beer.  Recipes themselves are often touted as the heart of a beer but such a wide range of flavors and colors exist within each beer style that a mediocre recipe fermented properly will be far more palatable than an exceptional recipe fermented poorly.  

Cleaning and sanitation are related yet different procedures.  Cleaning is the removal of soils both organic and inorganic from the fermentation vessel and is the more important of the two processes.  Soils provide wild yeasts and bacteria places to hide, thereby avoiding the sanitizing solution.  Poor cleaning will render ineffective any attempts at sanitation and will likely result in a contaminated product. Sanitation is the reduction of biological units to a level that will not affect or infect the fermenting beer and is typically performed using an acidic no-rinse solution.

Fermentation temperature must be controlled at all times.  Yeast are sensitive organisms who are at the mercy of their environments and reflect those conditions in their growth by-products which translate into flavors in finished beer.  Excessively high or low temperatures have different but equally unacceptable flavor consequences.  The bulk of what we describe as a “beer flavor” is fermentation derived and subsequently a result of fermentation conditions.

I stated earlier that specific recipe isn't as important as most expect but it does define what style of beer one is creating.  The best way to approach this is to envision a finished beer, ask oneself what you're trying to achieve, imagine flavor, and begin building based on this mental image.  Start by identifying where key components will come from and remain purposeful about what you're doing. 

Yeast is hands down the most influential ingredient and will determine the “soul” of a beer from a relatively neutral American, a fruity English, or a spicy Belgian.  Malt and hops should be selected for regional character and freshness.  It is important to avoid the “kid in a candy store” mentality because too many ingredients will muddy the final flavor; an easy rule of thumb is one to four malts and two to three hop selections for any given beer style. 

Brewing requires both halves of the brain as it's an art form that requires quite a bit of science and engineering.  Ultimately it's about peoples preferences, feelings, and the mysterious way smell, taste, and memory combine to produce “flavors” in our brains.
